---
published: true
title: On sailing
layout: post
tags: politics
---

I was idly thinking about the
[GIFT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penny_Arcade_(webcomic)#John_Gabriel.27s_.22Greater_Internet_Fuckwad_Theory.22),
which comes up often for me because I not only surf the net, I also
play networked games, where the theory plays out so often and so
emphatically. I was also thinking about the things that people think
are weird and foolish in other people, because I happen to be
traveling this week, and those things vary somewhat from one place to
another.

It occurred to me when I thought about those things at the same time
that they suggest a reason for the generally widespread hatred of gay
people.

Personally, I'm male and, sexually speaking, I like women. But I don't
particularly care whether another person prefers men or women or both,
or neither, regardless of their gender. It's a little hard for me to
see why anyone would care about such a thing, much less why they would
hold demonstrations or pass laws about it. It doesn't seem to me to be
a lot different from passing laws about what flavors of ice cream
you're allowed to like.

But when I was thinking about things today, a couple of things
occurred to me. First, I've observed that there is a tendency sort of
similar to the
[GIFT](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penny_Arcade_(webcomic)#John_Gabriel.27s_.22Greater_Internet_Fuckwad_Theory.22),
which I might call the "general public busybody theory", which is
that, first of all, a large fraction of people are inclined to be
busybodies, and the inclination increases as it gets easier and more
anonymous. In other words, the cheaper and easier it is to say that
somebody ought to do something, and the less well you know them, the
more likely you are to tell them what to do.

In general, I mean. Not everyone seems to have this impulse to boss
people around, but it does seem to be very common, and it seems like a
majority of people have it to some degree, some more than others.

The second piece of the puzzle is that if you have a sexual
preference--any sexual preference--then it's pretty likely to gross
another person out if he or she doesn't share it. I imagine that's one
reason that talking about sex is sort of impolite. That's a tacit
acknowledgement that people like different things, and what is
appealing to one person is upsetting to another.

This is not too surprising, really. If you're dispassionate about it,
all sex is at least a little bit gross and ridiculous. Being aroused,
of course, tends to obliterate any sense of embarrassment or distaste,
so we never get much chance to notice that the things we like are
weird or icky. But if you could somehow switch off all arousal, then I
think most people would notice that their own sexual tastes involve
things that are a little bit messy and undignified. It's pretty much
just the nature of mammalian reproduction to be that way.

But of course, people can't just turn off their sexual feelings, and
they're strong feelings. Accidentally discovering that someone is
turned on by something you are not can be very awkward. There's a sort
of "EEEEEEWWWWW!!!" moment that some folks in kinky-sex communities
call being "squicked". You are "squicked" when you are repelled by
something that sexually appeals to someone else. The kinky-sex folks
run into it kind of a lot, of course, and talk about it and joke about
it, and have sort of social conventions for taking the sting out of
it, so it doesn't interfere with their hobbies or friendships. Folks
less communicative about their sexual preferences don't really have
those conventions, because they don't really have the need or occasion
to develop them, so their only experience of being "squicked" is
generally the thing itself--the experience of stumbling upon someone
with a sexual appetite that makes them go "EEEEEEWWWWW!!!"

Well, nobody likes that, of course. If a person has little experience
of such encounters, or of talking about the subject, awkwardness may
well ensue.

When you combine that with the general public busybody theory, you
have a situation that seems like it's almost tailor-made for creating
prejudice against gay people (or against anyone with any sort of
tastes or proclivities that are in the minority). An average
heterosexual person (who is fairly likely to be a busybody, because
any random person is fairly likely to be a busybody) encounters a
random gay couple holding hands or otherwise acting like they care for
one another. This suggests the thought that this couple might be
sexually involved. That creates the opportunity to imagine a sexual
situation that makes our random busybody go "EEEEEEWWWWW!!!", which,
by the general public busybody theory, immediately creates a desire to
insist that they shouldn't be allowed to do that.

Once I think of it that way, the prejudice, demonstrations, and
legislation seem almost inevitable.
