---
published: true
title: On young-earth creationism
layout: post
---

Once, around ten years ago, someone in an online discussion said that
they were raised as a young-earth creationist, but had become curious
about the scientific account of the natural world and how it
worked. They wanted to know what the problems with young-earth
creationism were, from a scientific perspective.

I offered them the best answer I could manage. Here it is:

The first thing you have to do is set aside God as an
explanation. Sure, if you assume there's an omnipotent, omniscient,
supernatural creator, then you can explain anything by saying, "It's
God's will." The problem is, that doesn't really explain anything. It
doesn't tell you anything that you didn't already know.

Take infectious disease, for example. It's been a scourge of the human
race since prehistory. Saying, "It's God's will," or "the will of the
gods," for thousands of years didn't help people discover the causes
or cures for diseases. What did help was examining the natural world
with a curious mind, and seeking to understand what was found.

Curious people found out that there are tiny organisms, too small to
see, and they're everywhere. Some of them can colonize our bodies, and
some of those cause diseases. There are also chemicals we can use to
counter those invading organisms, and those chemicals help us defend
ourselves against many diseases.

We didn't learn those things from saying "disease is God's
will"—regardless of whether it is or isn't. We learned them from
looking at the evidence that the natural world gives us and reasoning
about what we found.

So the first thing you do is set God aside. Then you collect evidence
and see where it leads you. You try to find natural explanations for
the evidence that you find.

So far, that approach has been spectacularly successful.

From that perspective, there are some serious problems with
young-earth creationism.

For example, living things are made of lots of carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, and nitrogen, and smaller amounts of other things. There's
more than one kind of carbon, each identified by an atomic number. You
can find both carbon 12 and carbon 14 in living things.

It turns out that carbon 14 is radioactive, which means that it falls
apart, turning into atoms that aren't carbon 14 anymore. This happens
at a predictable rate: if you keep a lump of carbon 14 around for 5730
years, you'll find out that half of it isn't carbon 14 anymore; it's
turned into carbon 12.

So that should mean that eventually all the carbon 14 should
disappear, right? It should all turn into carbon 12. Except that
radiation from space striking the earth's upper atmosphere keeps
making more of it at a pretty steady rate. It rains down and mixes
into the atmosphere and gets carried all over the world.

One kind of carbon is as good as another to living things, so plants
absorb it, animals get it by eating the plants or each other, and it
ends up in everything living.

This, too, happens at a steady, predictable rate: out of every
trillion carbon atoms in a living creature, one of them is carbon 14.

But remember: carbon 14 is radioactive. It falls apart. After 5730
years, only one atom in _two_ trillion will be carbon 14, unless the
living thing keeps adding more.

Well, when creatures are alive, they _do_ keep adding more, by
consuming it from their environment. But when they die, they stop
adding carbon 14. The carbon 14 doesn't stop falling apart, though; it
keeps on turning into carbon 12. The longer the corpse lies there, the
more of it falls apart at that steady, predictable rate. So if you
measure the carbon 14 in a corpse, you can use simple arithmetic to
figure out how long ago it died.

When you do that with a lot of dead things, you find out that some of
them died more than 6000 years ago. In fact, a whole lot of them died
_way_ more than 6000 years ago.

This isn't the only way to find out how old things are, by the
way. You can measure age by the radioactive decay of elements besides
carbon. You can use other natural processes that happen at steady
rates, like the deposition of silt, or the changes in magnetism
recorded in rocks, or the rate that minerals trap ions the solar wind
and cosmic rays. When you use several different measures of age and
get close to the same result, you can be pretty confident that you
know the age of the thing you're measuring.

We've collected age measurements for a lot of things at this point. We
have tons of animal and plant remains that are millions—or in some
cases billions—of years old. We have minerals that are millions or
billions of years old. We have astronomical evidence of things in
space that are millions or billions of years old.

So now our naturalistic picture of the world needs to account for the
fact that we've found all this evidence of very old things. For
example, we need to account for living things that died a lot more
than 6000 years ago.

Now, we could just say that God created the world with all that
evidence already in it. That's cheating, though. Remember: the rules
are that we look for _natural_ explanations. That's science. If we
resort to supernatural explanations then we're doing theology, not
science.

Also, we'd have to wonder why the creator planted gobs of evidence
that the world is billions of years old, if he wanted us to believe
that it isn't, but that's not science, either

The simplest natural explanation for dead bodies more than 6000 years
old is that the earth is more than 6000 years old.

If you run through the mountains of evidence that scientists have
accumulated over the past five hundred years, you'll notice a lot more
situations like this, situations where you either say, "Well, God just
made the world like that," or else you try to think of a natural
explanation. The natural explanations tend to contradict young-earth
creationism.

The earth is more than 6000 years old because we can find things in it
that have been around longer than that. Living things evolved from
other, earlier living things because we've seen it happen in our
present environment, and because we've found many remains of living
things that are different from anything currently living, and because
we've found sequences of genetic material from which we can infer
ancestral relationships.

Human beings, for example, are apes because we have the skeletal
structure of apes, the blood types of apes, the reproductive biology
of apes, and the genetic makeup of apes. We know humans are apes in
exactly the same way that we know chimpanzees are apes.

We can measure how similar or different two pieces of genetic material
are, and from doing that we know that humans are closely related to
chimpanzees and bonobos. We also know that there used to be other
human-like species that are gone now, because we've found their tools
and their remains.

We know that there were stars in the sky more than 6000 years ago
because we know how fast light travels and we can measure the
distances to the stars pretty well. Some stars are so far away that
it's taken more than 6000 years for the light to reach us. For
example, the light from the Andromeda galaxy—the nearest galaxy to our
own—takes two and half million years to reach us.

You can still believe in young-earth creationism, if you want to. You
just have to also believe that, for some reason, the creator planted
evidence against it all over the place.

But if you want a natural explanation of what we see around us, then
young-earth creationism just doesn't do the job.

